               On Ambient Authority

This pill discusses the concept of Ambient Authority. We explain what
it is, what it is good for. And why it could be bad for you.

Ambient: it's in the air around, just ready to be picked.

Authority: The right to use a resource. The police has the right to
stop you to test your breath for alcohol.

The concept of ambient authority is best explained with an analogy.

Image you're in a supermarket. You have a basket in your left
hand. You walk around the aisles and pick the products you want with
your right hand and put those in your basket. At some point you decide
you have all you need and head for the checkout. You put all the items
on the conveyor belt. The cashier calculates the total price and you
pay. Then you take your items and leave.

What authorities are given to you by the supermarket?

1. browse the aisles.
2. collect products.
3. take them out. (paying changes ownership)

But there are more:

4. put products at other shelves;
5. eat the food before paying;
6. throw them on the ground (destroy items);
7. topple over a whole shelve (total chaos);
8. take your gun and shoot random shoppers and employees;
9. detonate your nuclear bomb and destroy the entire supermarket.

The first three are the expected behaviour. Most people behave like
that. (Luckily). The other five are unwanted behaviour. But there is
nothing a shop owner can do to prevent you from doing it. It could
report you to the police, but that's after the fact. I.e. Too Late.

In computers it's just like that.

Many processes need a subset of the capabilities that an OS
provides. A game needs keyboard and joystick input, audio and video
output, and some space on the disk to store progress. An interactive
game needs network connectivity to connect to the game server.

A text editor needs access to the file you want to edit. It needs
access to the printer and eventually hand it over to a mail-program to
send it to someone who needs that document.

You, as owner of the computer need the full nuclear option: delete
stuff you don't want anymore. It could be old emails, entire
applications or even to wipe the whole disk and format it and start
afresh.

In an ambient authority system, every process has all the power to do
everything, but we expect them to behave. Just like the supermarket.

But there are processes that abuse the ambient authority.

Take crypto-malware, it abuses the rights that your OS provides for
its own benefits. It searches your file-system for interesting files,
encrypts these, deletes the original, sends the encypyion key (over
the network) to the criminals and leaves a message for you suggesting
to pay for that key. It's extortion. But there is nothing that an
ambient authority system can do to prevent it.

The above example show that the malware had too much privileges. If it
did not have the privileges to browse the file system or to encrypt
and delete files, or to send a key to the criminals, it could not have
succeeded.

Principle of least authority

The principle of least authority states that each process just gets
those rights it needs and nothing more.

That's easier said than done.

In the next pill I'll describe capability security
