             The case against Ambient Authority

There are processes that abuse the ambient authority.

Take crypto-malware, it abuses the rights that your OS provides for
its own benefits: It searches for interesting files, encrypts these,
deletes the original, sends the encyption key (over the network) to
the criminals and leaves a message demanding you to pay for that
key. It's extortion, plain and simple. The malware clearly abused the
authority it has but there is nothing that an ambient authority system
can do to prevent it.

Even though the right to format a disk requires superuser privileges,
malware that deletes all your files is equally destructive from a user
perspective.


Root cause
----------

The root cause of this malware problem is that ambient authority makes
the end user responsible for the software he runs. When your OS shows
a popup that mentions "This (...) action could be dangerous, do you
want to continue", the OS is really saying that it cannot guarantee that
nothing bad happens. It can't help you here. You are on your own.

Instead, when you press "OK", the OS happily runs
the program and gives it full access to your files, photos, emails,
passwords, etc.

In other words: Ambient authority does not protect the end user
against malicious software.

I take it you are familiar with the advice: "Don't click on links in
emails", "Don't open attachments in emails", "Don't install software
from shady places (trust our app-store)." These messages are signs
that your OS cannot protect you against malware.

The user is left in the dark too:

Imagine, a clerk at city hall receives an email. It looks like a
request for a building permit. The attachment is called
'building-plans.doc'. How is the clerk going to know that it's really
a building plan and not some malware. After checking it is not a
.doc.exe file with the .exe hidden by Microsoft, the clerk needs to
open the file and carfully review the macros to see what they do.

To safely use the computer, the clerk needs to have good code auditing
skills. So does the doctor's assistent, school teacher, car mechanic,
politician, etc. It seems we (IT-people) are letting our users down.


In the next pill I'll describe sandboxing